docs/_tutorials/publish-subscribe.md, before:

---
layout: tutorials
title: Publish/Subscribe
summary: Demonstrates the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern
icon: publish-subscribe-icon.png
---

This tutorial will show you to how to connect a JMS 2.0 API client to a Solace Message Router using AMQP, add a topic subscription and publish a message matching this topic subscription. This is the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern as illustrated here:

![Sample Image Text]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-icon.png)

This tutorial is available in [GitHub]({{ site.repository }}){:target="_blank"} along with the other [Solace Getting Started AMQP Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-amqp }}){:target="_top"}.

At the end, this tutorial walks through downloading and running the sample from source.

This tutorial focuses on using a non-Solace JMS API implementation. For using the Solace JMS API see [Solace Getting Started JMS Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-jms }}){:target="_blank"}.

## Assumptions

This tutorial assumes the following:

* You are familiar with Solace messaging [core concepts]({{ site.docs-core-concepts }}){:target="_top"}.
* You have access to a running Solace message router with the following configuration:
    * Enabled “default” message VPN
    * Enabled “default” client username

One simple way to get access to a Solace message router is to start a Solace VMR load [as outlined here]({{ site.docs-vmr-setup }}){:target="_top"}. By default the Solace VMR will run with the “default” message VPN configured and ready for messaging. Going forward, this tutorial assumes that you are using the Solace VMR. If you are using a different Solace message router configuration, adapt the instructions to match your configuration.

## Goals

The goal of this tutorial is to demonstrate how to use JMS 2.0 API over AMQP using the Solace Message Router. This tutorial will show you:

1. How to build and send a message on a topic
2. How to subscribe to a topic and receive a message

## Solace message router properties

In order to send or receive messages to a Solace message router, you need to know a few details about how to connect to the Solace message router. Specifically, you need to know the following:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Resource</th>
<th>Value</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Host</td>
<td>String of the form <code>DNS name</code> or <code>IP:Port</code></td>
<td>This is the address clients use when connecting to the Solace Message Router to send and receive messages. For a Solace VMR this there is only a single interface so the IP is the same as the management IP address. For Solace message router appliances this is the host address of the message-backbone. The port number must match the port number for the plain text AMQP service on the router.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Message VPN</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>The “default” Solace message router Message VPN that this client will connect to.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Client Username</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>The “default” client username.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Java Messaging Service (JMS) Introduction

JMS is a standard API for sending and receiving messages. As such, in addition to information provided on the Solace developer portal, you may also look at some external sources for more details about JMS. The following are good places to start

1. [http://java.sun.com/products/jms/docs.html](http://java.sun.com/products/jms/docs.html){:target="_blank"}.
2. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service){:target="_blank"}
3. [https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/partmessaging.htm#GFIRP3](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/partmessaging.htm#GFIRP3){:target="_blank"}

The last (Oracle docs) link points you to the JEE official tutorials which provide a good introduction to JMS.

This tutorial focuses on using [JMS 2.0 (May 21, 2013)]({{ site.links-jms2-specification }}){:target="_blank"}, for [JMS 1.1 (April 12, 2002)]({{ site.links-jms1-specification }}){:target="_blank"} see [Solace Getting Started AMQP JMS 1.1 Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-amqp-jms1 }}){:target="_blank"}.

## Obtaining JMS 2.0 API

This tutorial assumes you have downloaded and successfully installed the [Apache Qpid JMS client](https://qpid.apache.org/components/jms/index.html). If your environment differs from the example, then adjust the build instructions appropriately.

The easiest way to install it is through Maven. See the project's *pom.xml* file for details.

## Connecting to the Solace Message Router

In order to send or receive messages, an application must start a JMS connection and a session.

There are three parameters for establishing the JMS connection: the Solace Message Router host name with the AMQP service port number, the client username and the optional password.

*TopicPublisher.java/TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
final String SOLACE_USERNAME = "clientUsername";
final String SOLACE_PASSWORD = "password";

String solaceHost = args[0];
ConnectionFactory connectionFactory = new JmsConnectionFactory(SOLACE_USERNAME, SOLACE_PASSWORD, solaceHost);
```

Notice how JMS 2.0 API combines `Connection` and `Session` objects into the `JMSContext` object.

*TopicPublisher.java/TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
JMSContext context = connectionFactory.createContext()
```

The session created by the `JMSContext` object by default is non-transacted and uses the acknowledge mode that automatically acknowledges a client's receipt of a message.

At this point the application is connected to the Solace Message Router and ready to publish messages.

## Publishing messages

A JMS *Producer* needs to be created in order to publish a message to a topic.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-details-2.png)

JMS 2.0 API allows the use of *method chaining* to create the producer, set the delivery mode and publish the message. We assign its delivery mode to `non-persistent` for better performance.

*TopicPublisher.java*
```java
final String TOPIC_NAME = "T/GettingStarted/pubsub";

Topic topic = context.createTopic(TOPIC_NAME);
TextMessage message = context.createTextMessage("Hello world!");
context.createProducer().setDeliveryMode(DeliveryMode.NON_PERSISTENT).send(topic, message);
```

If you execute the `TopicPublisher.java` program, it will successfully publish a message, but another application is required to receive the message.

## Receiving messages

To receive a message from a topic a JMS *Consumer* needs to be created.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-details-1.png)

JMS 2.0 API allows the use of *method chaining* to create the consumer, and receive messages published to the subscribed topic.

*TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
final String TOPIC_NAME = "T/GettingStarted/pubsub";

Topic topic = context.createTopic(TOPIC_NAME);
String message = context.createConsumer(topic).receiveBody(String.class);
```

If you execute the `TopicSubscriber.java` program, it will block at the `receiveBody(String.class)` call until a message is received. Now, if you execute the `TopicPublisher.java` that publishes a message, the `TopicSubscriber.java` program will resume and print out the received message.

## Summarizing

Combining the example source code shown above results in the following source code files:

*   [TopicPublisher.java]({{ site.repository }}/blob/master/src/main/java/com/solace/samples/TopicPublisher.java){:target="_blank"}
*   [TopicSubscriber.java]({{ site.repository }}/blob/master/src/main/java/com/solace/samples/TopicSubscriber.java){:target="_blank"}

### Getting the Source

Clone the GitHub repository containing the Solace samples.

```
git clone {{ site.repository }}
cd {{ site.baseurl | remove: '/'}}
```

### Building

You can build and run both example files directly from Eclipse.

If you prefer to use the command line, build a jar file that includes all dependencies by executing the following:

```sh
mvn compile
mvn assembly:single
```

or

```sh
./gradlew assemble
```

The examples can be run as:

```sh
java -cp ./target/solace-samples-amqp-jms2-1.0.1-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar  com.solace.samples.TopicSubscriber amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
java -cp ./target/solace-samples-amqp-jms2-1.0.1-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar  com.solace.samples.TopicPublisher amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
```

or

```sh
cd build/staged/bin
./topicSubscriber amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
./topicPublisher amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
```

### Sample Output

First, start `TopicSubscriber` so that it is up and waiting for published messages. You can start multiple instances of this application, and all of them will receive published messages.

```sh
$ java -cp ./target/solace-samples-amqp-jms2-1.0.1-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar  com.solace.samples.TopicSubscriber amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
TopicSubscriber is connecting to Solace router amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT...
Connected to the Solace router with client username 'clientUsername'.
Awaiting message...
```

Then you can start `TopicPublisher` to publish a message.
```sh
$ java -cp ./target/solace-samples-amqp-jms2-1.0.1-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar com.solace.samples.TopicPublisher amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
TopicPublisher is connecting to Solace router amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT…
Connected to the Solace Message VPN 'default' with client username 'clientUsername'.
Sending message 'Hello world!' to topic 'T/GettingStarted/pubsub'...
Sent successfully. Exiting...
```

Notice how the published message is received by the the `TopicSubscriber`.

```sh
Awaiting message...
Message received: 'Hello world!'
```

You now know how to use JMS 2.0 API over AMQP using the Solace Message Router to implement the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern.

If you have any issues publishing and receiving a message, check the [Solace community]({{ site.links-community }}){:target="_top"} for answers to common issues seen.

Commit message:

Expanded build instructions
Signed-off-by: Dmitri Fedorov <dfedorov.solace@gmail.com>

docs/_tutorials/publish-subscribe.md, after:

---
layout: tutorials
title: Publish/Subscribe
summary: Demonstrates the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern
icon: publish-subscribe-icon.png
---

This tutorial will show you to how to connect a JMS 2.0 API client to a Solace Message Router using AMQP, add a topic subscription and publish a message matching this topic subscription. This is the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern as illustrated here:

![Sample Image Text]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-icon.png)

This tutorial is available in [GitHub]({{ site.repository }}){:target="_blank"} along with the other [Solace Getting Started AMQP Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-amqp }}){:target="_top"}.

At the end, this tutorial walks through downloading and running the sample from source.

This tutorial focuses on using a non-Solace JMS API implementation. For using the Solace JMS API see [Solace Getting Started JMS Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-jms }}){:target="_blank"}.

## Assumptions

This tutorial assumes the following:

* You are familiar with Solace messaging [core concepts]({{ site.docs-core-concepts }}){:target="_top"}.
* You have access to a running Solace message router with the following configuration:
    * Enabled “default” message VPN
    * Enabled “default” client username

One simple way to get access to a Solace message router is to start a Solace VMR load [as outlined here]({{ site.docs-vmr-setup }}){:target="_top"}. By default the Solace VMR will run with the “default” message VPN configured and ready for messaging. Going forward, this tutorial assumes that you are using the Solace VMR. If you are using a different Solace message router configuration, adapt the instructions to match your configuration.

## Goals

The goal of this tutorial is to demonstrate how to use JMS 2.0 API over AMQP using the Solace Message Router. This tutorial will show you:

1. How to build and send a message on a topic
2. How to subscribe to a topic and receive a message

## Solace message router properties

In order to send or receive messages to a Solace message router, you need to know a few details about how to connect to the Solace message router. Specifically, you need to know the following:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Resource</th>
<th>Value</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Host</td>
<td>String of the form <code>DNS name</code> or <code>IP:Port</code></td>
<td>This is the address clients use when connecting to the Solace Message Router to send and receive messages. For a Solace VMR this there is only a single interface so the IP is the same as the management IP address. For Solace message router appliances this is the host address of the message-backbone. The port number must match the port number for the plain text AMQP service on the router.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Message VPN</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>The “default” Solace message router Message VPN that this client will connect to.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Client Username</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>The “default” client username.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Java Messaging Service (JMS) Introduction

JMS is a standard API for sending and receiving messages. As such, in addition to information provided on the Solace developer portal, you may also look at some external sources for more details about JMS. The following are good places to start

1. [http://java.sun.com/products/jms/docs.html](http://java.sun.com/products/jms/docs.html){:target="_blank"}.
2. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service){:target="_blank"}
3. [https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/partmessaging.htm#GFIRP3](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/partmessaging.htm#GFIRP3){:target="_blank"}

The last (Oracle docs) link points you to the JEE official tutorials which provide a good introduction to JMS.

This tutorial focuses on using [JMS 2.0 (May 21, 2013)]({{ site.links-jms2-specification }}){:target="_blank"}, for [JMS 1.1 (April 12, 2002)]({{ site.links-jms1-specification }}){:target="_blank"} see [Solace Getting Started AMQP JMS 1.1 Tutorials]({{ site.links-get-started-amqp-jms1 }}){:target="_blank"}.

## Obtaining JMS 2.0 API

This tutorial assumes you have downloaded and successfully installed the [Apache Qpid JMS client](https://qpid.apache.org/components/jms/index.html). If your environment differs from the example, then adjust the build instructions appropriately.

The easiest way to install it is through Gradle or Maven.

### Get the API: Using Gradle

```
dependencies {
    compile("org.apache.qpid:qpid-jms-client:0.23.+")
}
```

### Get the API: Using Maven

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.qpid</groupId>
    <artifactId>qpid-jms-client</artifactId>
    <version>[0.23,)</version>
</dependency>
```

## Connecting to the Solace Message Router

In order to send or receive messages, an application must start a JMS connection and a session.

There are three parameters for establishing the JMS connection: the Solace Message Router host name with the AMQP service port number, the client username and the optional password.

*TopicPublisher.java/TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
final String SOLACE_USERNAME = "clientUsername";
final String SOLACE_PASSWORD = "password";

String solaceHost = args[0];
ConnectionFactory connectionFactory = new JmsConnectionFactory(SOLACE_USERNAME, SOLACE_PASSWORD, solaceHost);
```

Notice how JMS 2.0 API combines `Connection` and `Session` objects into the `JMSContext` object.

*TopicPublisher.java/TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
JMSContext context = connectionFactory.createContext()
```

The session created by the `JMSContext` object by default is non-transacted and uses the acknowledge mode that automatically acknowledges a client's receipt of a message.

At this point the application is connected to the Solace Message Router and ready to publish messages.

## Publishing messages

A JMS *Producer* needs to be created in order to publish a message to a topic.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-details-2.png)

JMS 2.0 API allows the use of *method chaining* to create the producer, set the delivery mode and publish the message. We assign its delivery mode to `non-persistent` for better performance.

*TopicPublisher.java*
```java
final String TOPIC_NAME = "T/GettingStarted/pubsub";

Topic topic = context.createTopic(TOPIC_NAME);
TextMessage message = context.createTextMessage("Hello world!");
context.createProducer().setDeliveryMode(DeliveryMode.NON_PERSISTENT).send(topic, message);
```

If you execute the `TopicPublisher.java` program, it will successfully publish a message, but another application is required to receive the message.

## Receiving messages

To receive a message from a topic a JMS *Consumer* needs to be created.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/publish-subscribe-details-1.png)

JMS 2.0 API allows the use of *method chaining* to create the consumer, and receive messages published to the subscribed topic.

*TopicSubscriber.java*
```java
final String TOPIC_NAME = "T/GettingStarted/pubsub";

Topic topic = context.createTopic(TOPIC_NAME);
String message = context.createConsumer(topic).receiveBody(String.class);
```

If you execute the `TopicSubscriber.java` program, it will block at the `receiveBody(String.class)` call until a message is received. Now, if you execute the `TopicPublisher.java` that publishes a message, the `TopicSubscriber.java` program will resume and print out the received message.

## Summarizing

Combining the example source code shown above results in the following source code files:

*   [TopicPublisher.java]({{ site.repository }}/blob/master/src/main/java/com/solace/samples/TopicPublisher.java){:target="_blank"}
*   [TopicSubscriber.java]({{ site.repository }}/blob/master/src/main/java/com/solace/samples/TopicSubscriber.java){:target="_blank"}

### Getting the Source

Clone the GitHub repository containing the Solace samples.

```
git clone {{ site.repository }}
cd {{ site.baseurl | remove: '/'}}
```

### Building

You can build and run both example files directly from Eclipse or with Gradle.

```sh
./gradlew assemble
```

The examples can be run as:

```sh
cd build/staged/bin
./topicSubscriber amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
./topicPublisher amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
```

### Sample Output

First, start `TopicSubscriber` so that it is up and waiting for published messages. You can start multiple instances of this application, and all of them will receive published messages.

```sh
$ topicSubscriber amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
TopicSubscriber is connecting to Solace router amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT...
Connected to the Solace router with client username 'clientUsername'.
Awaiting message...
```

Then you can start `TopicPublisher` to publish a message.
```sh
$ topicPublisher amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT
TopicPublisher is connecting to Solace router amqp://SOLACE_HOST:AMQP_PORT…
Connected to the Solace Message VPN 'default' with client username 'clientUsername'.
Sending message 'Hello world!' to topic 'T/GettingStarted/pubsub'...
Sent successfully. Exiting...
```

Notice how the published message is received by the the `TopicSubscriber`.

```sh
Awaiting message...
Message received: 'Hello world!'
```

You now know how to use JMS 2.0 API over AMQP using the Solace Message Router to implement the publish/subscribe message exchange pattern.

If you have any issues publishing and receiving a message, check the [Solace community]({{ site.links-community }}){:target="_top"} for answers to common issues seen.
